<!-- wiki_tool v2 -->
The Constitution of the United States does not require that any federal judges have any particular educational or career background, but the work of the Court involves complex questions of law – ranging from constitutional law to administrative law to admiralty law – and consequentially, a legal education has become a de facto prerequisite to appointment on the United States Supreme Court. Every person who has been nominated to the Court has been an attorney.
Before the advent of modern law schools in the United States, justices, like most attorneys of the time, completed their legal studies by "reading law" (studying under and acting as an apprentice to more experienced attorneys) rather than attending a formal program. The first Justice to be appointed who had attended an actual law school was Levi Woodbury, appointed to the Court in 1846. Woodbury had attended Tapping Reeve Law School in Litchfield, Connecticut, the most prestigious law school in the United States in that day, prior to his admission to the bar in 1812. However, Woodbury did not earn a law degree. Woodbury's successor on the Court, Benjamin Robbins Curtis, who received his law degree from Harvard Law School in 1832, and was appointed to the Court in 1851, was the first Justice to bear such a credential.
Associate Justice James F. Byrnes, whose short tenure lasted from June 1941 to October 1942, was the last Justice without a law degree to be appointed; Stanley Forman Reed, who served on the Court from 1938 to 1957, was the last sitting Justice from such a background. In total, of the 114 justices appointed to the Court, 49 have had law degrees, an additional 18 attended some law school but did not receive a degree, and 47 received their legal education without any law school attendance.
Currently serving justices are listed in bold below.


== Four or more justices ==
Harvard Law School – 22 alumni; 18 graduates
Harry Blackmun
Louis Brandeis
William J. Brennan Jr.
Stephen Breyer
Henry Billings Brown – also studied law at Yale, did not receive law degree from either
Harold H. Burton
Benjamin Robbins Curtis
Felix Frankfurter
Melville Fuller – did not graduate; Chief Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg – graduated from Columbia Law School
Neil Gorsuch
Horace Gray
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Ketanji Brown Jackson
Elena Kagan
Anthony Kennedy
William Henry Moody – did not graduate
Lewis F. Powell Jr. – LL.M. graduate
John Roberts – Chief Justice
Edward Terry Sanford
Antonin Scalia
David Souter
Yale Law School – 11 alumni, 9 graduates
Samuel Alito
Henry Billings Brown – also studied law at Harvard, did not receive law degree from either
David Davis
Abe Fortas
Brett Kavanaugh
Sherman Minton – LL.M. graduate, attended Indiana University
George Shiras Jr. – did not graduate
Sonia Sotomayor
Potter Stewart
Clarence Thomas
Byron White
Columbia Law School – 7 alumni, 4 graduates
Benjamin N. Cardozo – completed two years, did not graduate
William O. Douglas
Ruth Bader Ginsburg – also attended Harvard Law School
Charles Evans Hughes – Chief Justice
Joseph McKenna – studied at the law school, did not graduate
Stanley Forman Reed – also attended University of Virginia School of Law, did not graduate from either
Harlan F. Stone – Chief Justice


== Three justices ==
University of Michigan Law School
William Rufus Day – did not graduate
Frank Murphy
George Sutherland
Litchfield Law School (defunct)
Henry Baldwin
Ward Hunt
Levi Woodbury – first justice to have attended law school


== Two justices ==
Albany Law School
David J. Brewer
Robert H. Jackson –  completed one-year program, awarded certificate of completion
Cincinnati Law School (University of Cincinnati College of Law)
William Howard Taft – Chief Justice (and former President)
Willis Van Devanter
Cumberland School of Law
Howell E. Jackson
Horace Harmon Lurton
Indiana University Maurer School of Law
Sherman Minton
Wiley Rutledge – studied part-time before leaving and completing degree at University of Colorado Law School
Northwestern University School of Law
Arthur Goldberg
John Paul Stevens
Stanford Law School
Sandra Day O'Connor
William Rehnquist – Chief Justice
University of Virginia School of Law
James Clark McReynolds
Stanley Forman Reed – also attended Columbia Law School, did not graduate from either
Washington and Lee University School of Law
Joseph Rucker Lamar
Lewis F. Powell Jr. – also received an LL.M. from Harvard Law School


== One justice ==
Centre College School of Law (defunct)
Fred M. Vinson – Chief Justice
Howard University School of Law
Thurgood Marshall
Middle Temple – one of the four Inns of Court in London, England
John Rutledge
Mitchell Hamline School of Law then known as St. Paul College of Law
Warren E. Burger – Chief Justice
New York Law School
John Marshall Harlan II
Notre Dame Law School
Amy Coney Barrett
Transylvania University School of Law
John Marshall Harlan
Tulane University School of Law
Edward White – Chief Justice
University of Alabama School of Law
Hugo Black
University of California, Berkeley School of Law
Earl Warren – Chief Justice
University of Colorado Law School
Wiley Rutledge – originally studied at Indiana University prior to attending the University of Colorado
University of Missouri–Kansas City School of Law
Charles Evans Whittaker
University of Pennsylvania Law School
Owen Roberts
University of Texas School of Law
Tom C. Clark


== University or college educated ==
These justices were educated at the equivalent of an undergraduate level, but did not receive legal education at the graduate level, the model under which law schools in the United States are currently organized.

Carleton College
Pierce Butler
Case Western Reserve University
John Hessin Clarke
College of William & Mary
John Marshall – Chief Justice
Philip P. Barbour
Bushrod Washington
John Blair Jr.
College of the Holy Cross
Clarence Thomas
Columbia University
John Jay – Chief Justice
Samuel Blatchford
Dartmouth College
Salmon P. Chase – Chief Justice
Dickinson College
Robert Cooper Grier
Roger B. Taney – Chief Justice
Emory University
Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar
Harvard University
William Cushing
John McLean
Joseph Story
Kenyon College
Stanley Matthews
Middlebury College
Samuel Nelson
Princeton University
Oliver Ellsworth – Chief Justice
William Johnson
Henry Brockholst Livingston
William Paterson
Mahlon Pitney
Smith Thompson
James M. Wayne
Rutgers University
Joseph P. Bradley
Saint Joseph's University
Joseph McKenna – also studied at Columbia Law School for a month between nomination to the Court and confirmation
Transylvania University
Samuel Freeman Miller - earned a medical degree
Robert Trimble
University of Georgia
John Archibald Campbell
University of St Andrews
James Wilson – also attended the University of Edinburgh and University of Glasgow but did not graduate
Washington and Lee University
Thomas Todd
Williams College
Stephen Johnson Field
Yale University
William Strong
Morrison Waite—Chief Justice
William Burnham Woods


== No university education ==
Some justices received no education in a university setting, but were instead either trained through apprenticeships or were self-taught, as was common with many lawyers prior to the mid-20th century. This practice is often known as reading the law.

James F. Byrnes
John Catron
Samuel Chase
Nathan Clifford
Peter V. Daniel
Gabriel Duvall
James Iredell
Thomas Johnson
John McKinley
Alfred Moore
Rufus W. Peckham
Noah Haynes Swayne


== See also ==
List of law schools in the United States


== References ==

"Judges of the United States Courts". Official website of the Federal Judicial Center. Archived from the original on November 7, 2004. Retrieved November 21, 2004.
source for seat information
"Members of the Supreme Court from the Supreme Court of the United States" (PDF). Official website of the Supreme Court of the United States. Retrieved May 29, 2005.
PDF (28 kB)
source for term of active service